Disclaimer: Alan Kay compared Pyramids to (bad) software architecture in an
interview with Joe Armstrong. In this text, I just want to elaborate on some
points. I got my entire "knowledge" about pyramids from Asterix and Obelix, so
my points might be historically inaccurate, but I hope that the reader still
will get the point.

A pyramid has no architecture. It looks like a geometric object, can stand for
thousands of year, but it's not much more than a pile of stones, aligned in a
certain way.

A pyramid may contain secret chambers, mazes, and maybe even some halls
filled with gold and some mummified pharao. But given the size of a pyramid,
this internal infrastructure is negligible. The pyramid was built to show off.
Look how big a pile of stones we're capable of building. Look how many slaves we
have to pile up stones. The most powerful has the biggest pyramid. Our edifice
is huge, and took thousands of man-years to build, mostly unqualified work,
except for a handful of "architects", who planned and co-ordinated the building
process.

What is the reason a particular stone of a pyramid is located at a particular
space? It was put there, when the stones below were already there, and the ones
above not yet. You cannot take out a stone and put it at some other place.
Depending on the stone's position, you have to remove huge parts of the pyramid
in order to get your hand on a particular stone. You can not refactor a pyramid.

If you want to add further stones on the top, you might succeed once or twice,
but any further stones will just roll down to the bottom and break during that
process, possibly causing further damage to the existing pyramid. So you have to
widen the foundation of the pyramid first. The bigger the pyramid, the more
stones you need to add just in order to add a single stone at the top. The
pyramid does not scale.

The mazes inside the pyramid are only understood by a small elite. Woe to the
peasant that enters the pyramid too deeply! If he finds his way out, he'll never
untertake a further attempt of exploration again.

A pyramid is a riddle for those engaging with it after the original designers
have been gone. It takes a long time to figure out why it was built in a
particular way, and most reasoning about it is based on pure speculation. By the
time the pyramid is built, even its original designers might have forgotten why
it was done in this particular wayâ€”or died in the meantime.

Pyramids are the artifacts of societies with strict cast-like social orders. The
broad mass of unwashed slaves do most of the hard work. Some smaller caste of
architects, managers, and foremans plan and manage the whole process. The
resulting edifice is just a vanity project of some pharao on the very top of the
social pyramid. (Conway's law is at play here.) He wants his pyramid to be
bigger than those of his predecessors. The pharao's power is reflected in the
sheer size of his pyramid. The bigger, the better.
